---
layout: post
comments: true
permalink: /:title.html
title: 'd.Construct 2005'
author: Richard
date: 2005/11/15
alias: /dconstruct-2005
tags:
---

The "[UK's first grassroots Web 2.0 conference][]" took place last week,
right on my door step. It was held in a [converted church][], so insert
your own congregation/peaching puns here.

As [Andy Budd][] pointed out in the opening presentation, you can't have
a Web 2.0 conference without a discussion of what Web 2.0 is. Andy's
pitch was that, yes, it's a buzz word, but words are useful to have to
communicate a bag of related ideas. Although none of the technology is
new, having a Web 2.0 state of mind means thinking in terms of richer
more pleasurable user experiences, open formats, community involvement,
and not being scared of JavaScript. Regarding the technology, he made a
compelling analogy to [steam engines][]: invented in 1st century, but
not put to serious use until the industrial revolution of the 18th.

Examples given: [ononemap][], [netvibes.com][], [backpackit.com][],
[meebo.com][] (web-based IM client), [writely.com][] (a Web 2.0 word
processor, with collaboration features: absolutely stunning).

So there's now a renewed energy around web, with a continuing shift from
document delivery to application delivery. There was a hint that some of
the inventiveness of new user interfaces was a reaction to a stalling in
the evolution of XHTML standards. But Andy cautioned to remember the
[hype cycle][] (he didn't say where we were on the [curve][]), suggested
that people should maybe have a business model, and that we shouldn't
throw out usability or standards.

Looking ahead, he sees strong activity in [OpenLazlo][], [XUL][], Flex,
Widgets and, of course, Ajax.

In the Q&A time, the phrase [microformats][] came up, which was a new
phrase for me. Appears to be a mind set for putting together simple
problem-specific formats to solve problems, as opposed to one honking
big format to solve all problems. Sounds sane.

[Stuart Langridge][] was second, and he's a great speaker. I thought I
recognized [that voice][]. If you get an opportunity to see him talk, go
along.

His topic was DOM scripting, which he described thus: as CSS separates
presentation from structure, so JavaScript separates behaviour from
structure. In practice this means waiting for the DOM structure of a
page to load in a browser, and then walking the structure decorating
JavaScript event handlers where needed. This gives you graceful
degradation: produce a regular page, then change it at the last minute
if the JavaScript is executed. The example he gave was [a library for making tables sortable][]: adding a JavaScript include to a page causes
the script to walk the tree looking for tables and adding column heading
sorting links. In this way you can evolve a site with Web 2.0 functions.

There's an issue with this: users could start interacting with the page
before the JavaScript has the opportunity to change the page. The
answer, apparently, will be [new browser hooks][] to have the script run
after the structure is loaded, but before the page is rendered.
Something to look out for.

[Simon Willison][] from Flickr/Yahoo! was up next and gave a
introduction to the [Flickr API][]. Apparently the API exists because
the founders wouldn't trust their photos to a start up, so didn't expect
anyone to trust Flickr without a way to access the data. It's also
easier than writing an all-singing export tool (let the users do it
themselves) with the side effect of lots of innovative applications get
built. In fact, the summary benefits of providing the API are: better
software design, user trust and innovation elsewhere.

Flickr is built on PHP, MySQL with some C/C++ for certain performance
areas and Java for longer running tasks.

[Ben Metcalfe][] is the project leader for [backstage.bbc.co.uk][], and
told us about the current offerings from the BBC. The deal is that you
can get at travel XML ([problems][] on the roads or trains), news and
sport RSS, TV listings and, soon, weather data but all on strictly
non-commercial usage. We then saw the first public demo off the BBC
Programme Catalog ("IMDB for BBC") which is a rich data set of who
appeared in what when.

[Tom Hume][]'s presentation on mobile was insightful as always. He came
up with a nice description of picture messaging as giftingâ€”like the
Royal Mail's "I saw this and thought of you" ad campaign. His comment
that perhaps AJAX was a step backwards surely should have led to some
chair throwing, but no-one took the bait.

"The state of the Art on the Flash Platform" was a presentation from
[Aral Balkan][]. He explained that there's now plenty of open source
Flash work going on, which I think came as a pleasant surprise to many
in the audience. Although we know Flash mostly from funky comedy
animations or annoying "skip intros", Aral's been working on a business
application for Marvel Comics. I've [written about Flash and Web 2.0][]
before, so won't comment further here.

The day ended with [Cory Doctorow][] talking about the evils of [DRM in Europe][].


  [UK's first grassroots Web 2.0 conference]: http://www.clearleft.com/dconstruct05/
  [converted church]: http://www.fabrica.org.uk/whatisfab.htm
  [Andy Budd]: http://www.andybudd.com/
  [steam engines]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steam_engine
  [ononemap]: http://ononemap.com/
  [netvibes.com]: http://www.netvibes.com/
  [backpackit.com]: http://backpackit.com/
  [meebo.com]: http://www.meebo.com/
  [writely.com]: http://www.writely.com/
  [hype cycle]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hype_cycle
  [curve]: http://www.ayeconference.com/wiki/scribble.cgi?read=HypeCycle
  [OpenLazlo]: http://www.openlaszlo.org/
  [XUL]: http://www.mozilla.org/projects/xul/
  [microformats]: http://www.microformats.org/
  [Stuart Langridge]: http://www.kryogenix.org/days/
  [that voice]: http://www.lugradio.org/
  [a library for making tables sortable]: http://www.kryogenix.org/code/browser/sorttable/
  [new browser hooks]: http://www.infosauce.org/articles/2005/09/24/cross-browser-ondomcontentloaded
  [Simon Willison]: http://simon.incutio.com/
  [Flickr API]: http://www.flickr.com/services/api/
  [Ben Metcalfe]: http://benmetcalfe.com/blog/
  [backstage.bbc.co.uk]: http://backstage.bbc.co.uk/
  [problems]: http://cyber-junky.co.uk/projects/map/?file=traveldata
  [Tom Hume]: http://www.tomhume.org/
  [Aral Balkan]: http://www.flashant.org/
  [written about Flash and Web 2.0]: http://blog.spiralarm.com/richard/2005/09/openamf.html
  [Cory Doctorow]: http://www.craphound.com/
  [DRM in Europe]: http://www.eff.org/IP/DRM/NAVSHP/

