---
layout: post
comments: true
permalink: /:title.html
title: 'JavaOne 2005'
author: Richard
date: 2005/07/11
alias: /javaone-2005
tags:
---

<img src="/img/posts/flkexport2018/16108070868_8691c4b4e3_o.jpg" width="507" height="550" alt="Poster">

[JavaOne][] was useful, as usual. Here's the list of things I found
interesting or need to look into further:

The mobility general session was packed full of information. The main
news was progress on MSA (Mobile Service Architecture, [JSR-248][] and
[JSR-249][]) initiative. This strand of work irons out some of the
weirdness between consumer and enterprise Java ME stacks, will support
more capable handsets and will reduce variability. For example, the MSA
group will tighten up some of the specifications and will reduce the
number of options handsets manufacturers can leave out.

It's encouraging that MSA is being driven by Nokia and Vodafone -- it's
not just Sun alone pushing this along. The detailed MSA technical
session was given by Mark Duesener of Vodafone and Asko Komsi of Nokia.
They stated that the four steps of the initiative are to: select JSRs;
clarify (reduce specification ambiguity); add requirements, such as
hardware requirements or codecs; and add guidance. They also explained
that the MSA initiative is a continuous process and that the licensing
for handset manufacturers was being simplified. If you've spotted some
similarity between JTWI and MDA, you'd be right, and MSA is backward
compatible with JTWI. Oh, there was a throw away line telling us that
three quarters of all handsets are Java enabled.

Back at the mobility general session, it was great to see [SavaJe][]
running some demos and starting their developer program. We saw a CDC
prototype handset (single VM, multitasking) running a MIDLet and
streaming some video.

[MIDP 3.0][] is in the early JSR stages. Expect richer graphics, shared
libraries, inter-MIDLet communication, concurrent MIDLets, device
capabilities support and secure RMS.

Still with the mobility general session, there was talk of "service
players", i.e., scriptable players for the Java ME platform. The
interesting part of this is that the players, being ME based, could be
relatively transparently updated on the handset, which is a nice trick
and combined with JSR-226 (SVG) and the rich graphics JSRs could make
for some interesting players.

The Blue-ray announcement (BD-J) is all over the news, so I won't detail
that. In the mobility general session the presenter predicted "faster
growth than mobile".

I knew there were a lot of Java Cards out there (1bn), but I didn't know
that 50% of SIMs are Java Cards. The next generation adds biometric and
other forms of authentication and goes contactless. We saw a NTT DoCoMo
on stage demoing i-Mode FeliCA, which is both an API and a chip on
mobile phones. It supports "contactless" non-cash payments. The demo
showed a mobile being charged up from a credit card, and then used to
make a ticket purchase by making a selection on the phone and then
touching the phone against a reader -- no central server was involved to
approve the purchase. Staying with NTT DoCoMo, they attribute US\$6bn of
revenue directly to Java, and have been working for a year on the next
generation of DoJa.

Another demo was from RIM, talking about mobile enterprise. He had a
nice line, something like: "It may seem obvious, but a good wireless
enterprise application has to be both a good wireless application and a
good enterprise application". Which was a nice cue to list all the
issues of wireless development and then all the issue of enterprise
development. It was good to see Blackberry's MDS Studio and MDS engine
running. The demo we saw was a restaurant finder which was XML+Java
Script run in a player, plus a good old stock quote application where
the stock information was pushed to the device.

The last demo was from Sprint. I was pretty much hosed with information
at this point, but from what I can tell they have a nice way to deploy a
web service to a mobile device by generating MIDP 1.0-compatible stub
code, *Ã  la* RMI. They're doing R&D with NetBeans looking at ways to
make application development faster, and the demo they showed was
driving instructions using Mappoint.

I think that's about all from the mobility general session. Elsewhere...

I finally got to learn more about SyncML thanks to the [Sync4J][] guys
squeezing in a technical presentation (given by Stefano Fornari,
Funambol). If the licensing is reasonable, it could be a good general
synchronization tool. I must read the booklet they gave me and go
download a copy of their code.

A related session was on mobile device management (Andre Kruetzfeldt and
Christopher David of Sun, John Rizzo of Aplix and Jens Paetzold, Siemens
AG). They figure that it costs operators US\$50 per support call, which
is why this client, server and protocol specification is being worked on
(JSR-246, JSR-233). The SyncML-based protocol is defined by the OMA, I
believe. The Java ME bindings are in early access at the end of this
month, and the draft of the server-side bindings will follow.

IMS and SIP are going to become more important so I took the opportunity
to attend the technical session from Siemens on this topic, which was
given by Peter Gersing, and Dennis Luemkemann. They've found that
operators triple their revenue by increasing interoperability, and
that's what IMP (IP Multimedia Subsystem) and SIP (Session Initiation
Protocol) is all about. IMS and SIP aren't limited to mobile networks,
but that's where the focus is right now, and in particular on 3G
networks. IMS provides a bunch of services (so you don't have to...)
including charging, presence, QoS, single signon, location, group lists.
So with SIP you lookup and initiate services. You go through the IMS
layer to authenticate and lookup services, but then you're handed off
with a point-to-point connection for the rest of the conversation. The
Java bindings are JSR-180 (client) and JSR-116 (server). Apparently
there's an MIDP 2.0 implementation, so we can get going today without
having to wait for handsets with JSR-180 support. The interesting
question is how many networks are running with IMS and SIP... and the
answer is that some will roll out this year.

The Real-Life Use of Location APIs talk, by Sean Sheedy, Ryan Wick and
Zane Lyon of Nextel was focused pretty much on GPS. It's not clear that
GPS in mobile phones is going to happen particularly soon outside of the
USA, but it was good to learn some of the gotchas of that technology
(smoothing readings, cold/hot/warm readings, etc). However, the Parlay
presentation from Florin Van Slingerland of Ericsson did give a nice
demonstration of location technology: using a Parlay "network resource
gateway" (server) to initiate a call to "the person closest to me". Ok,
the demo didn't actually work, but it was late in the talk and we'd seen
a heck of a lot of API detail up to that point, which was enough to
figure it all out. How many networks have Parlay infrastructure? About
27, but I need to track that number down.

A few mobile things came out of the general sessions. IBM tried to give
a demo of a mobile application written in some variant of SWT, and then
went on to show how it would run unmodified on the desktop. And the
point of that would be... what? Nokia also gave an demo of an
Eclipse-based tool for SOA, deploying web services and middleware access
and "modules" from a mobile device. To be fair, it was probably a very
early release of the tool, but it was wholly unconvincing. Good things
will come of it, but maybe not the way I saw them demoed. It looked like
going a long way round to do something, against the main flow of Java
towards simplicity, but I'll have to reserve final judgement until the
tool and framework appears on Nokia forum.

That's the bad stuff out of the way, and in contrast the Tue and Thu
general sessions had some wonderful stuff. We saw the use of mobile and
bluetooth in India for market traders, and a modification of the code
([JUIC][]) for accessing the JavaOne schedule. On Thur we saw remote
device debugging over bluetooth and the NetBeans mobile flow editor --
probably a great way to pull together a prototype, but I'm guessing
almost certainly violates some of the principles given by Allen Lau of
Tira Wireless for high performance Java ME.

Also in the Gosling general session there was a nice demo of moving
running applications between machines (a PC and a Mac) or "pouring" then
between devices with tilt sensors. Cute. More impressive was the
NetBeans [Matisse][] demo -- finally a GUI tool that looks usable.
Overall, NetBeans is looking good these days, but I always end up
running back to Eclipse because the CVS support in Eclipse overwhelms
all other factors.

What else....

There was a lot of buzz around Spring. We hit Rod Johnson and Juergen
Hoeller's (packed) presentation and finally understood what it's all
about. The whole dependency injection side does look like it might well
simplify some applications and it was great to get some examples of AOP
that aren't just logging or security. I have the [Spring in Action][]
book now, so it's just a matter of actually reading it. In other news,
BEA announced they were rolling Spring into their product line and would
be offering support, which should be taken as a huge
waving-of-the-victory flag for the Spring guys.

I could say the same for Hibernate and EJB 3.0. I didn't learn a great
deal about Hibernate, other than "it's won" as a persistence mechanism
more or less. [Goul][] was probably the first to point out the risk of
fragmentation of the language via vendor-created annotations, but,
everyone stay calm, and work towards the JCP-blessed annotations and
it'll be fine.

Something to look forward to... There's lots of web services updates in
JAX-WS 2, but not until Java SE 6.

The McNealy open mic sessions was a good thing, and I hope it becomes a
regular fixture. Top advice, such as have crazy ideas but make sure
you're right.

Finally, last time I was at JavaOne the logo changed. This year it's a
name change to drop the "2", so we now have: Java ME, Java SE and Java
EE. Existing products (e.g., J2SE 5.0) keep their existing names.

And that's all I can remember for now. During the conference I did
wonder if I was getting enough value this year. But looking back at how
much of written today, I'm thinking it may have been the most valuable
year yet.

  [JavaOne]: http://java.sun.com/javaone/sf/see_you_next_year.jsp
  [JSR-248]: http://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=248
  [JSR-249]: http://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=249
  [SavaJe]: http://www.savaje.com/
  [MIDP 3.0]: http://www.jcp.org/en/jsr/detail?id=271
  [Sync4J]: http://sync4j.funambol.com
  [JUIC]: https://juic.dev.java.net/
  [Matisse]: http://www.netbeans.org/kb/articles/matisse.html
  [Spring in Action]: http://www.amazon.co.uk/exec/obidos/ASIN/1932394354/richarddallaway
  [Goul]: http://www.goulbourn.com/
