---
layout: post
comments: true
permalink: /:title
title: 'Cobertura'
author: Richard
date: 2005/06/16
alias: /cobertura-8
tags:
---

Code coverage: running unit tests in such a way as to be able to tell
how much of your source code is being exercised by those tests.

It's a very useful thing to do and there are quite a few tools out there
to help. Some time back [Goul][] introduced me to what I think of as the
market leader: [Clover][] from Cenqua. There are now [lots][] of open
source alternatives, so I thought I'd try the best one out to see how
well it works.

The best open source alternative to my eyes is [Cobertura][]. Best
because it works, is being actively developed and because it looks just
like Clover. I decided to try it out (version 1.4) on one of our JDK 1.5
projects which uses WebWork, Hibernate, a bit of Apache Jakarta
networking and some threading. Not a big project, but real-world rather
than "Hello World".

There's no top-level direct comparison to be made between Cobertura and
Clover because the two products measure different things. Cobertura
gives you line coverage, branch coverage and complexity; Clover gives
you statements, methods, and conditionals. However they both report how
many times each line of code has been executed, and both highlight the
zero lines in red.

What I found was very good agreement on a line-by-line basis between the
reports produced by the products. But there are differences:

-   Cobertura's summary figures are optimistic, telling me I have 100%
branch coverage in places where I don't... but the detailed reports
do show non-executed branches. Perhaps it's just a rounding error.
-   Clover shows lines of code that have been partly executed. For
example: a test on a boolean that has only evaluated to true even
though it has been called many times. Cobertura treats the line as
exercised. Of course if you always have a matching `else` for every
`if`, this won't worry you because Cobertura will spot the
non-executed condition.
-   Clover shows details for inner classes (Cobertura bundles them
together). I don't think this is a big deal; I just happened to
notice the difference.
-   Clover took 90 seconds to set up (their "quickstart" is that quick),
whereas I spent about 2 hours with Cobertura. Having said that, out
of the box Cobertura didn't report on the coverage of test cases
themselves, which is how I like it to be (others don't). I didn't
find a way to make Clover ignore test cases in reports, but I'm sure
there's a way.
-   I had to wriggle with the classpath a little bit for Cobertura
because of a clash in the `asm.jar` used by Cobertura and Hibernate.
The solution was to add Cobertura's jar to the end of my classpath.
I had no such problems with Clover.
-   Clover's documentation is better, although Cobertura has a nice
write up over at [IBM's developerWorks][] site.
-   Clover can track coverage over time. This isn't that interesting for
me, but I can see how it could be important in some working
environments.
-   Clover has IDE plugins; Cobertura does not. I run coverage reports
on the server, so this isn't an issue for me.

Summary: The Cobertura developers have produced something stunningly
useful, but Clover is the better product for now. But don't be put off:
Cobertura is good enough if you're willing to put in a little bit of
time.


  [Goul]: http://www.goulbourn.com/
  [Clover]: http://www.cenqua.com/clover/
  [lots]: http://java-source.net/open-source/code-coverage
  [Cobertura]: http://cobertura.sourceforge.net/
  [IBM's developerWorks]: http://www-128.ibm.com/developerworks/java/library/j-cobertura/

