---
layout: post
comments: true
permalink: /:title
title: 'Mobile Monday: Monetisation through Advertising'
author: Richard
date: 2008/05/13
alias: /mobile-monday-monetisation-through-advertisin
tags:
---

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/d6y/2489464226" title="Mobile Monday by Richard Dallaway, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3274/2489464226_6c8688fa34_z.jpg" width="640" height="438" alt="Mobile Monday"></a>

Last night I was at [Mobile Monday London][] to catch four
presentations. The topic: advertising on mobile. The summary: there's a
need for better measurement.

[Claire Valoti][] from Mindshare was up first, giving the agency view of
mobile advertising. She split the appeal of mobile in a media plan in to
two parts: as a delivery mechanic (to extended reach, getting to a
winder audience in a different mode); and as a platform (for couponing,
or video uploads). She then went on to describe some issues and
themes... and standardization and measurement were pretty much top of
the list. That is, there's currently no good standard measure of reach,
sessions, traffic or users for mobile advertising. And even if there
was, it needs to be integrated into existing web buying systems, rather
than via a mobile-specific system.

Claire had a good observation on social networking, and the importance
for mobile. The m:metrics numbers quoted showed that the 18-24 and 25-34
age groups were more likely to be using social networking from the
mobile, compared to 13-17 age group. It's not just about a youth market.

Another good point was made that events drive handset usage, as does
"the right handset". An example given: at the end of the football
(soccer) season, there's a drop in usage; during the season people are
out and about and will use the mobile internet to look up news. As for
"the right device", just look at [the figures][] for internet usage on
the iPhone compared to anything else....

Obviously mobile advertising has to be used in the context of the whole
campaign, and it has to be relevant content: don't go taking an ad made
for TV and slapping it on a mobile. Use the right techniques to get
reach (banners, SMS, bluetooth), use location information to make it
relevant, use coupons and free content to make it useful to the
customer. And the user experience needs to be more streamlined: don't
issue mobile coupons without telling your retail staff how to handle
them.

Aside from measurement, another barrier to growing advertising budgets
is the number of people involved in setting up a mobile campaign. The
buying experience needs to be more streamlined.

Mobile advertising challenges were summarized as: speed, reach, cost,
ROI, standards, and measurement. As examples of reach issues: Claire was
interested in QR codes, but only 10% of mobile devices have a reader
installed; buying from Blyk or similar to get an audience was described
as having "limited reach" at the moment; mobile search needs to scale up
as, right now, it's hard to spend the budget.

[Shan Henderson][] from Vodafone kicked off his presentation by saying
that it's the metrics that matter. Click rate is not the full story, but
it's often the headline. Also audience demographic, behaviour, session
length, frequency and reach are all important because "money follows
measurement in media". He showed the "measurement gap" graph. I'm sure
the slides will be available soon, but for now I've done a shaky
recreation:

<a href="https://www.flickr.com/photos/d6y/2489490412" title="measurement gap by Richard Dallaway, on Flickr"><img src="https://farm4.staticflickr.com/3090/2489490412_6a26c07bd5_z.jpg?zz=1" width="640" height="480" alt="measurement gap"></a>

(I'm guessing [Edward Tufte][] would not approve). So, we all agree it
seems: we need better standards for measurement and more efficency in
the buying and selling of advertising in order for the market to grow.

To address this, Shan went on to describe the [GSMA Metrics Study][]
which aims to make it easy to plan and measure mobile media. Later this
year it's going to produce (one or more of): guidelines, best practices,
definitions, technical standards, responsible ad practices, content
standards. This will all be via an as yet unnamed ABC-like trusted
independent organization.

[Russell Buckley][] took the stage to talk about Admob, a self-serve and
full-service ad network, shifting 2.bn ads a month, in 160 countries via
3000 mobile web sites. They select mobile sites, put ads on them, and
share the revenue with the site. He described mobile advertising as good
for: bands; to promote mobile websites; for operators to monetize their
sites; and content owners to have access to a new marketing channel.

There was then a page of logos of who's advertising, and it showed that
the US is generally ahead in terms of adopting mobile advertising. In
fact, ad requests by country (to March) showed 47% of ads were for the
USA. Other figures were: India (9.8%); UK (6.7%); South Africa (5.3%);
Indonesia (4.7%); Romania (1.9%); Canada (1.3%); Philippines (1.3%);
France (1%); Israel (1%); RoW (20.1%). By handset, Nokia were the top,
although they are dropping: something that's not yet reflected in their
market share.

Russell presented some case studies. MTV wanted to drive traffic to an
awards site, and using text adverts they had a 300% traffic boost and
400% increase in downloads. Land Rover USA saw 23% of users interacting
with an advertised landing page, with 3% going on to click the link to
make a call to a dealer. Adidas saw a CTR of "well above 3%". Coca-Cola
saw a CTR of 1.31%, but 130% watched a mobile video that was being
promoted (some people watched it more than once).

[Ray Anderson from Bango][] described the basic model for using
advertising as: select a channel, measure response, look at user
purchases, analyse ROI, then... repeat.

He made some great observations on the issues of search. Depending on
the combinations of search provider and operator, you may find you get
very different results from the advertising spend (especially if the
content is transcoded). But he had a graph that compared the revenue
Bango customers had received over time from Orange and Vodafone: the
doubling (or more) in the graphs when the operators introduced a search
page was impressive.

After the talks there was a brief panel session. All good stuff. And
held in a great building.

Photos: [from Route79][], [from appelquist][], [from Alex Craxton][]

Video and audio: usual appear on the [Mobile Monday web site][Mobile Monday London] after a little while, so check there.


  [Mobile Monday London]: http://mobilemonday.org.uk/
  [Claire Valoti]: http://www.linkedin.com/pub/3/820/896
  [the figures]: http://arstechnica.com/journals/apple.ars/2008/03/18/iphone-crushes-competition-in-smartphone-usage
  [Shan Henderson]: http://www.linkedin.com/pub/1/5b4/a7a
  [Edward Tufte]: http://www.edwardtufte.com/tufte/
  [GSMA Metrics Study]: http://www.gsmworld.com/news/press_2008/press08_11.shtml
  [Russell Buckley]: http://www.linkedin.com/in/russellbuckley
  [Ray Anderson from Bango]: http://bango.com
  [from Route79]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/route79/tags/momolondon/
  [from appelquist]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/torgo/
  [from Alex Craxton]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/alexcraxton/sets/72157605031653604/
