---
layout: post
title: "Headless Raspberry Pi and the Mac: Basics"
author: Richard Dallaway
---

I only occasionally work with a Raspberry Pi,
which means I keep forgetting and having to rediscovery some pretty basic tasks.

This post is my crib sheet for working with a headless Pi...


<!-- break -->

# OS Install (SD Card set up)

[Download] the latest Raspbian (e.g., `2017-09-07-raspbian-stretch`) and unzip it to expose the `.img` file.

Insert the SD card and find the device name:

```bash
$ diskutil list
```

For example, you'll probably see something like:

```
/dev/disk2 (external, physical):
   #:                       TYPE NAME          SIZE       IDENTIFIER
   0:     FDisk_partition_scheme              *15.9 GB    disk2
   1:             Windows_FAT_16 RECOVERY      1.5 GB     disk2s1
   2:                      Linux               33.6 MB    disk2s5
```

So: the SD card is `/dev/disk2`. Install the OS...

```bash
$ sudo dd bs=1m if=/path/to/2017-09-07-raspbian-stretch.img of=/dev/disk2
```

This takes about 30 minutes.

# Prepare for First Boot

We want to:

1. Enable SSH
2. Configure WiFi (e.g., for Pi Zero W 1.1)
3. Possibly modify `cmdline.txt` boot configuration
4. Eject the SD card

## Enable SSH

Add an empty file called `ssh` on the SD card to enable SSH on boot. 
The boot partition will be mounted in MacOS as `/Volumes/boot`, so:

```bash
$ touch /Volumes/boot/ssh
```

## Configure WiFi

The WiFi configuration is set up by creating a `wpa_supplicant.conf` file on the boot partition.
Note: this file is automatically moved elsewhere on boot, and so will vanish from the boot partition.

The file should be something like:

```
ctrl_interface=DIR=/var/run/wpa_supplicant GROUP=netdev
update_config=1
country=GB

network={
    ssid="Your Network SID"
    psk="Your Wifi Password"
    key_mgmt=WPA-PSK
}
```

## Configure cmdline

_I'm not sure if this is needed or not anymore._

Modify `/Volumes/boot/cmdline.txt` to read:

```
dwc_otg.lpm_enable=0 console=serial0,115200 console=tty1 root=PARTUUID=e17410f1-02 rootfstype=ext4 elevator=deadline fsck.repair=yes rootwait modules-load=dwc2,g_ether quiet splash plymouth.ignore-serial-consoles
```

## Eject the SD card

``` bash
$ diskutil unmountDisk /dev/disk2
```

# First Boot

Put the SD card into the Pi and power it up.

## Connect via Wifi

```
$ ssh pi@raspberrypi.local
```

## Connect via USB

Check you plug the cable into the USB socket, and not the one marked for power.

The USB connection also provides power, so you don't need both plugged in.

For SSH connection you need an OTG USB cable: other kinds of USB cable just won't work.

```
$ ssh pi@raspberrypi.home
```

To access the internet from the Pi over SSH:
On Mac, in system settings, sharing, enable internet sharing with RNDIS/Ethernet Gadget.

# Troubleshooting

## Locating the Pi on the network

`nmap` is great but you have to install it from source on the mac. Use it like this:

```bash
$ ~/Developer/third-party/nmap/nmap-7.60/nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24
```


...assuming you installed in in ~/Developer.

Or use `apr -a` instead.

# After boot

1. Change the password.
2. `scp` a new ssh key across.
3. Run `sudo raspi-config` to enable ssh, camera, VLC, or whatever you need.

## SSH key

The instructions for this are [on the raspberrypi.org](https://www.raspberrypi.org/documentation/remote-access/ssh/passwordless.md).

## Running VLC

Install [the viewer](https://www.realvnc.com/en/connect/download/viewer/) on the Mac.


# Accessing the Pi Filesystem

It's sometimes convenient to take the SD card,
plug it into the Mac, and noodle around the ext3 filesystem (e.g., to look at logs).

MacOS doesn't support ext3 out of the box.
Buy [Paragon ExtFS](https://backstage.paragon-software.com/home/extfs-mac/): it works really well.

[Download]: https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/raspbian/
